---
title: Ambien... it gives you REST
layout: post
comments: true
tags:
 - Cassandra
 - Spring
---

A few months back (okay, more than a few), I had a client that was doing a lot with Spring Boot and REST interfaces. Now, I have never really been a front-end programmer. I always messed around with the backend and doing things with data that folks hadn't really done before. But the front-end was new territory for me.

Well, I started looking into Spring Boot and how to create a REST API for tables in Cassandra. What I found was that it was extremely formulaic, and in a way scriptable.  

And that's when I came up with Ambien, a project that will give you REST!

<!--excerpt-->

## The Setup

The idea was what if someone had a table in a Cassandra (or DSE) cluster and simply wanted to create a REST API for the CRUD (INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, SELECT) operations against that table. How simple is it to create such a REST API.

Basically, how hard is it to go from "I have a table in Cassandra over here" to a full application implementing a REST API for access to that table.

## Ambien

Well, what started off as a basic example turned into an exercise into a "How To" document... until I realized that it's really formulaic. Moreover, the Java driver (which I'm most familiar with) has a _lot_ of the information you'd need get at things like the name and data types of the columns in the table.

Additionally, since Cassandra only supports certain SELECT statements (mainly it has restrictions on the predicates one can use with a given table) you could fill out the basic query patterns a priori.

Now, one thing I didn't want to tackle was to cover _every_ conceivable predicate. That is too much surface area to cover. Instead, my thinking was to make something that was extensible or that the user could turn off certain things I had generated.

### What is Ambien

Basically, in a nutshell, Ambien gives you REST. I'm almost more proud of the name for this project than the actual project itself.

Ambien is a Java application that will connect to a Cassandra (or DSE) cluster and will produce a Spring Boot Java application that is a REST API for one or more tables. It leverages the DataStax Java driver to connect to the cluster, inspect the metadata for the specified tables, and creates the entity classes, repository classes, and REST controller classes automatically.

It uses the DataStax Java Driver's object mapper to handle the entity and repository classes. This is straightforward as the metadata for the tables is exactly the information that is needed to create these classes. In addition to the basic save and delete operations, which are pretty straightforward, Ambien fills in some of the common query patterns, too:
* selecting by partition key(s)
* selecting by partition key(s) and the first clustering column via equality
* selecting by partition key(s) and the first clustering column via inequality (`<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`)
* selecting by partition key(s) and the first clustering column via equality and the second clustering column via equality
* selecting by partition key(s) and the first clustering column via equality and the second clustering column via inequality (`<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`)
* and so on

I did stop short of some of the other query patterns that are allowed, such as combining clustering column predicates (e.g., `WHERE partitionKey = ? AND clusteringColumn > ? AND clusteringColumn <= ?`)) or `IN` clauses (e.g., `WHERE partitionKey IN ?`). The combinations are basically too many to consider.

The idea in creating a Spring Boot application is that it's not a black box. It is fully expected that you would edit, tweak, delete, add, etc, to the Java project. There's nothing wrong with removing API endponts or adding new ones. For example, if you need to write to multiple tables from a REST endpont or if you need to query multiple tables to respond to a query, that more complicated logic can be put into a new endpoint in the Controller code. It's _supposed_ to be like that!

### How to get Ambien

You can navigate to the [Ambien repo](https://github.com/brianmhess/ambien). There you can grab a particular branch, download, build, and run. But you can also go to the [Releases](https://github.com/brianmhess/ambien/releases) section. From there you can choose a release (I recommend the latest, which as of today is [v0.1.3](https://github.com/brianmhess/ambien/releases/tag/v0.1.3)). There is an artifact in the release called, simply `ambien`. This is an executable jar that can be downloaded and (once you change the permissions to allow for execution) you can simply run `./ambien` (on Windows you will need to run `java -jar ambien`... it's an executable _and_ a jar).

### How to run Ambien

You can use various options when running Ambien. The help looks like this:
```
Usage: ambien -host <hostname> -k <keyspaceName> -t <tableName> -o <outputDir> [options]
OPTIONS:
  -host <hostname>               Contact point for DSE [required]
  -dc <dataCenter>               Data center to connect to [dc1]
  -kt <keyspace.table>           Keyspace and Table to use, can be a comma-separated list [required]
  -o <outputDir>                 Directory to write to (must be empty) [required]
  -configFile <filename>         File with configuration options [none]
  -port <portNumber>             CQL Port Number [9042]
  -user <username>               Cassandra username [none]
  -pw <password>                 Password for user [none]
  -ssl-truststore-path <path>    Path to SSL truststore [none]
  -ssl-truststore-pw <pwd>       Password for SSL truststore [none]
  -ssl-keystore-path <path>      Path to SSL keystore [none]
  -ssl-keystore-pw <pwd>         Password for SSL keystore [none]
  -httpPort <httpPort>           Port for HTTP REST endpoint [8222]
  -endpointRoot <root>           REST endpoint to create (use '$keyspace' for keyspace name and '$table' for table name) [api/$keyspace/$table]
  -packageName <pkg>             Package name [hessian.ambien]
```

The simplest form is to provide a host, data center, output directory, and a list of keyspace/table names to build the API for. For example,
```
./ambien -host localhost -dc dc1 -o /tmp/ambienoutput -kt ks1.tbl1,ks2.tbl2
```
will build a REST API for the `ks1.tbl1` and `ks2.tbl2` tables stored on the Cassandra instance at the `localhost`, using `dc1` as the local datacenter.

You can, of course, also specify options such as username, password, keystore/truststore information, which HTTP port to use, the package name, and the root of the endpoints to use.

See [here](https://github.com/brianmhess/ambien) for more information.

## Enjoy your REST!




